..  Copyright (C)  Jeffrey Elkner, Allen B. Downey and Chris Meyers.
    Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
    or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
    with Invariant Sections being Forward, Preface, and Contributor List, no
    Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is
    included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".

Sets of objects
===============


Composition
-----------

By now, you have seen several examples of composition. One of the first
examples was using a method invocation as part of an expression.  Another
example is the nested structure of statements; you can put an ``if`` statement
within a ``while`` loop, within another ``if`` statement, and so on.

Having seen this pattern, and having learned about lists and objects, you
should not be surprised to learn that you can create lists of objects. You can
also create objects that contain lists (as attributes); you can create lists
that contain lists; you can create objects that contain objects; and so on.

In this chapter and the next, we will look at some examples of these
combinations, using ``Card`` objects as an example.


``Card`` objects
----------------

If you are not familiar with common playing cards, now would be a good time to
get a deck, or else this chapter might not make much sense.  There are
fifty-two cards in a deck, each of which belongs to one of four suits and one
of thirteen ranks. The suits are Spades, Hearts, Diamonds, and Clubs (in
descending order in bridge). The ranks are Ace, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
Jack, Queen, and King. Depending on the game that you are playing, the rank of
Ace may be higher than King or lower than 2.

If we want to define a new object to represent a playing card, it is obvious
what the attributes should be: ``rank`` and ``suit``. It is not as obvious what
type the attributes should be. One possibility is to use strings containing
words like ``"Spade"`` for suits and ``"Queen"`` for ranks. One problem with
this implementation is that it would not be easy to compare cards to see which
had a higher rank or suit.

An alternative is to use integers to **encode** the ranks and suits.  By
encode, we do not mean what some people think, which is to encrypt or translate
into a secret code. What a computer scientist means by encode is to define a
mapping between a sequence of numbers and the items I want to represent. For
example:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    Spades   -->  3
    Hearts   -->  2
    Diamonds -->  1
    Clubs    -->  0

An obvious feature of this mapping is that the suits map to integers in order,
so we can compare suits by comparing integers. The mapping for ranks is fairly
obvious; each of the numerical ranks maps to the corresponding integer, and for
face cards:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    Jack   -->  11
    Queen  -->  12
    King   -->  13

The reason we are using mathematical notation for these mappings is that they
are not part of the Python program. They are part of the program design, but
they never appear explicitly in the code. The class definition for the ``Card``
type looks like this:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Card:
        def __init__(self, suit=0, rank=0):
            self.suit = suit
            self.rank = rank

As usual, we provide an initialization method that takes an optional parameter
for each attribute.

To create an object that represents the 3 of Clubs, use this command:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    three_of_clubs = Card(0, 3)

The first argument, ``0``, represents the suit Clubs.


Class attributes and the ``__str__`` method
-------------------------------------------

In order to print ``Card`` objects in a way that people can easily read, we
want to map the integer codes onto words. A natural way to do that is with
lists of strings. We assign these lists to **class attributes** at the top of
the class definition:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Card:
        suits = ["Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", "Spades"]
        ranks = ["narf", "Ace", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7",
                 "8", "9", "10", "Jack", "Queen", "King"]
       
        def __str__(self):
            return (self.ranks[self.rank] + " of " +
                    self.suits[self.suit])

A class attribute is defined outside of any method, and it can be accessed from
any of the methods in the class.

Inside ``__str__``, we can use ``suits`` and ``ranks`` to map the numerical
values of ``suit`` and ``rank`` to strings. For example, the expression
``self.suits[self.suit]`` means use the attribute ``suit`` from the object
``self`` as an index into the class attribute named ``suits``, and select the
appropriate string.

The reason for the ``"narf"`` in the first element in ``ranks`` is to act as a
place keeper for the zero-eth element of the list, which will never be used.
The only valid ranks are 1 to 13. This wasted item is not entirely necessary.
We could have started at 0, as usual, but it is less confusing to encode 2 as
2, 3 as 3, and so on.

With the methods we have so far, we can create and print cards:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    >>> card1 = Card(1, 11)
    >>> print card1
    Jack of Diamonds

Class attributes like ``suits`` are shared by all ``Card`` objects. The
advantage of this is that we can use any ``Card`` object to access the class
attributes:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    >>> card2 = Card(1, 3)
    >>> print card2
    3 of Diamonds
    >>> print card2.suits[1]
    Diamonds

The disadvantage is that if we modify a class attribute, it affects every
instance of the class. For example, if we decide that Jack of Diamonds should
really be called Jack of Swirly Whales, we could do this:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    >>> card1.suits[1] = "Swirly Whales"
    >>> print card1
    Jack of Swirly Whales

The problem is that *all* of the Diamonds just became Swirly Whales:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    >>> print card2
    3 of Swirly Whales

It is usually not a good idea to modify class attributes.


Comparing cards
---------------

For primitive types, there are conditional operators ( ``<``, ``>``, ``==``,
etc.) that compare values and determine when one is greater than, less than, or
equal to another. For user-defined types, we can override the behavior of the
built-in operators by providing a method named ``__cmp__``. By convention,
``__cmp__`` takes two parameters, ``self`` and ``other``, and returns 1 if the
first object is greater, -1 if the second object is greater, and 0 if they are
equal to each other.

Some types are completely ordered, which means that you can compare any two
elements and tell which is bigger. For example, the integers and the
floating-point numbers are completely ordered. Some sets are unordered, which
means that there is no meaningful way to say that one element is bigger than
another. For example, the fruits are unordered, which is why you cannot compare
apples and oranges.

The set of playing cards is partially ordered, which means that sometimes you
can compare cards and sometimes not. For example, you know that the 3 of Clubs
is higher than the 2 of Clubs, and the 3 of Diamonds is higher than the 3 of
Clubs. But which is better, the 3 of Clubs or the 2 of Diamonds? One has a
higher rank, but the other has a higher suit.

In order to make cards comparable, you have to decide which is more important,
rank or suit. To be honest, the choice is arbitrary. For the sake of choosing,
we will say that suit is more important, because a new deck of cards comes
sorted with all the Clubs together, followed by all the Diamonds, and so on.

With that decided, we can write ``__cmp__``:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    def __cmp__(self, other):
        # check the suits
        if self.suit > other.suit: return 1
        if self.suit < other.suit: return -1
        # suits are the same... check ranks
        if self.rank > other.rank: return 1
        if self.rank < other.rank: return -1
        # ranks are the same... it's a tie
        return 0

In this ordering, Aces appear lower than Deuces (2s).


Decks
-----

Now that we have objects to represent ``Card``\s, the next logical step is to
define a class to represent a ``Deck``. Of course, a deck is made up of cards,
so each ``Deck`` object will contain a list of cards as an attribute.

The following is a class definition for the ``Deck`` class. The initialization
method creates the attribute ``cards`` and generates the standard set of
fifty-two cards:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Deck:
        def __init__(self):
            self.cards = []
            for suit in range(4):
                for rank in range(1, 14):
                    self.cards.append(Card(suit, rank))

The easiest way to populate the deck is with a nested loop. The outer loop
enumerates the suits from 0 to 3. The inner loop enumerates the ranks from 1 to
13. Since the outer loop iterates four times, and the inner loop iterates
thirteen times, the total number of times the body is executed is fifty-two
(thirteen times four). Each iteration creates a new instance of ``Card`` with
the current suit and rank, and appends that card to the ``cards`` list.

The ``append`` method works on lists but not, of course, tuples.


Printing the deck
-----------------

As usual, when we define a new type of object we want a method that prints the
contents of an object. To print a ``Deck``, we traverse the list and print each
``Card``:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Deck:
        ...
        def print_deck(self):
            for card in self.cards:
                print card

Here, and from now on, the ellipsis ( ``...``) indicates that we have omitted
the other methods in the class.

As an alternative to ``print_deck``, we could write a ``__str__`` method for
the ``Deck`` class. The advantage of ``__str__`` is that it is more flexible.
Rather than just printing the contents of the object, it generates a string
representation that other parts of the program can manipulate before printing,
or store for later use.

Here is a version of ``__str__`` that returns a string representation of a
``Deck``. To add a bit of pizzazz, it arranges the cards in a cascade where
each card is indented one space more than the previous card:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Deck:
        ...
        def __str__(self):
            s = ""
            for i in range(len(self.cards)):
                s = s + " " * i + str(self.cards[i]) + "\n"
            return s


This example demonstrates several features. First, instead of traversing
``self.cards`` and assigning each card to a variable, we are using ``i`` as a
loop variable and an index into the list of cards.

Second, we are using the string multiplication operator to indent each card by
one more space than the last. The expression ``" " * i`` yields a number of
spaces equal to the current value of ``i``.

Third, instead of using the ``print`` command to print the cards, we use the
``str`` function. Passing an object as an argument to ``str`` is equivalent to
invoking the ``__str__`` method on the object.

Finally, we are using the variable ``s`` as an **accumulator**.  Initially,
``s`` is the empty string. Each time through the loop, a new string is
generated and concatenated with the old value of ``s`` to get the new value.
When the loop ends, ``s`` contains the complete string representation of the
``Deck``, which looks like this:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    >>> deck = Deck()
    >>> print deck
    Ace of Clubs
     2 of Clubs
      3 of Clubs
       4 of Clubs
         5 of Clubs
           6 of Clubs
            7 of Clubs
             8 of Clubs
              9 of Clubs
               10 of Clubs
                Jack of Clubs
                 Queen of Clubs
                  King of Clubs
                   Ace of Diamonds

And so on. Even though the result appears on 52 lines, it is one long string
that contains newlines.


Shuffling the deck
------------------

If a deck is perfectly shuffled, then any card is equally likely to appear
anywhere in the deck, and any location in the deck is equally likely to contain
any card.

To shuffle the deck, we will use the ``randrange`` function from the ``random``
module. With two integer arguments, ``a`` and ``b``, ``randrange`` chooses a
random integer in the range ``a <= x < b``. Since the upper bound is strictly
less than ``b``, we can use the length of a list as the second parameter, and
we are guaranteed to get a legal index. For example, this expression chooses
the index of a random card in a deck:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    random.randrange(0, len(self.cards))

An easy way to shuffle the deck is by traversing the cards and swapping each
card with a randomly chosen one. It is possible that the card will be swapped
with itself, but that is fine. In fact, if we precluded that possibility, the
order of the cards would be less than entirely random:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Deck:
        ...
        def shuffle(self):
            import random
            num_cards = len(self.cards)
            for i in range(num_cards):
                j = random.randrange(i, num_cards)
                self.cards[i], self.cards[j] = self.cards[j], self.cards[i]

Rather than assume that there are fifty-two cards in the deck, we get the
actual length of the list and store it in ``num_cards``.

For each card in the deck, we choose a random card from among the cards that
haven't been shuffled yet. Then we swap the current card ( ``i``) with the
selected card ( ``j``). To swap the cards we use a tuple assignment:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    self.cards[i], self.cards[j] = self.cards[j], self.cards[i]


Removing and dealing cards
--------------------------

Another method that would be useful for the ``Deck`` class is ``remove``,
which takes a card as a parameter, removes it, and returns ``True`` if
the card was in the deck and ``False`` otherwise:

.. sourcecode:: python

    
    class Deck:
        ...
        def remove(self, card):
            if card in self.cards:
                self.cards.remove(card)
                return True 
            else:
                return False 


The ``in`` operator returns ``True`` if the first operand is in the second,
which must be a list or a tuple. If the first operand is an object, Python uses
the object's ``__cmp__`` method to determine equality with items in the list.
Since the ``__cmp__`` in the ``Card`` class checks for deep equality, the
``remove`` method checks for deep equality.

To deal cards, we want to remove and return the top card. The list method
``pop`` provides a convenient way to do that:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Deck:
        ...
        def pop(self):
            return self.cards.pop()

Actually, ``pop`` removes the *last* card in the list, so we are in effect
dealing from the bottom of the deck.

One more operation that we are likely to want is the boolean function
``is_empty``, which returns true if the deck contains no cards:

.. sourcecode:: python
    
    class Deck:
        ...
        def is_empty(self):
            return (len(self.cards) == 0)


Glossary
--------

.. glossary::

    encode
        To represent one set of values using another set of values by
        constructing a mapping between them.

    class attribute
        A variable that is defined inside a class definition but outside any
        method. Class attributes are accessible from any method in the class
        and are shared by all instances of the class.

    accumulator
        A variable used in a loop to accumulate a series of values, such as by
        concatenating them onto a string or adding them to a running sum.


Exercises
---------

#. Modify ``__cmp__`` so that Aces are ranked higher than Kings.
