<?xml version="1.0"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0 plus SVG 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/2002/04/xhtml-math-svg/xhtml-math-svg.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><title>How to Think Like a Computer Scientist: 11. Tuples and recursion</title><link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /></head><body bgcolor="white"><h1 class="title">11. Tuples and recursion</h1><div class="toc"><ol><li><a href="#auto0">Mutability and tuples</a></li><li><a href="#auto1">Tuple assignment</a></li><li><a href="#auto2">Tuples as return values</a></li><li><a href="#auto3">Recursion</a></li><li><a href="#auto4">Recursive list traversal</a></li><li><a href="#auto5">Comparing values of different types</a></li><li><a href="#auto6">A recursive max function</a></li><li><a href="#auto7">Pure functions and modifiers</a></li><li><a href="#auto8">Which is better?</a></li><li><a href="#auto9">Glossary</a></li><li><a href="#auto10">Exercises</a></li></ol></div><div class="content"><span></span><a name="tuplechap"></a><a name="index01"></a><h2>11.1 Mutability and tuples<a name="auto0"></a></h2><a name="index02"></a><a name="index03"></a><a name="index04"></a><a name="index05"></a><a name="index06"></a><p>So far, you have seen two compound types: strings, which are made up of
characters; and lists, which are made up of elements of any type.  One of the
differences we noted is that the elements of a list can be modified, but the
characters in a string cannot.  In other words, strings are
<b>immutable</b> and lists are <b>mutable</b>.</p><a name="index07"></a><a name="index08"></a><p>There is another type in Python called a <b>tuple</b> that is
similar to a list except that it is immutable.  Syntactically, a tuple is a
comma-separated list of values:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = 2, 4, 6, 8, 10
</pre><p>Although it is not necessary, it is conventional to enclose tuples in
parentheses:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = (2, 4, 6, 8, 10)
</pre><p>To create a tuple with a single element, we have to include the final
comma:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = (5,)
&gt;&gt;&gt; type(tup)
&lt;type 'tuple'&gt;
</pre><p>Without the comma, Python treats <code>(5)</code> as an integer in
parentheses:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = (5)
&gt;&gt;&gt; type(tup)
&lt;type 'int'&gt;
</pre><p>Syntax issues aside, tuples support the same sequence operations as 
strings and lists.  The index operator selects an element from a tuple.</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = ('a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e')
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup[0]
'a'
</pre><p>And the slice operator selects a range of elements.</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup[1:3]
('b', 'c')
</pre><p>But if we try to use item assignment to modify one of the elements of the
tuple, we get a error:
</p><a name="index09"></a><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup[0] = 'X'
TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
</pre><p>Of course, even if we can't modify the elements of a tuple, we can replace
it with a different tuple:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = ('X',) + tup[1:]
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup
('X', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e')
</pre><p>Alternatively, we could first convert it to a list, modify it, and convert
it back into a tuple:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = ('X', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e')
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = list(tup)
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup
['X', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup[0] = 'a'
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup = tuple(tup)
&gt;&gt;&gt; tup
('a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e')
</pre><h2>11.2 Tuple assignment<a name="auto1"></a></h2><a name="tuple assignment"></a><a name="index10"></a><a name="index11"></a><p>Once in a while, it is useful to swap the values of two variables.  With
conventional assignment statements, we have to use a temporary variable.  For
example, to swap <code>a</code> and <code>b</code>:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-variable">temp</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">a</span>
<span class="py-src-variable">a</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">b</span>
<span class="py-src-variable">b</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">temp</span>
</pre><p>If we have to do this often, this approach becomes cumbersome.  Python
provides a form of <b>tuple assignment</b> that solves this problem
neatly:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-variable">a</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">b</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">b</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">a</span>
</pre><p>The left side is a tuple of variables; the right side is a tuple of values.  
Each value is assigned to its respective variable.  All the expressions on the
right side are evaluated before any of the assignments.  This feature makes
tuple assignment quite versatile.</p><p>Naturally, the number of variables on the left and the number of values on
the right have to be the same:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; a, b, c, d = 1, 2, 3
ValueError: need more than 3 values to unpack 
</pre><h2>11.3 Tuples as return values<a name="auto2"></a></h2><a name="index12"></a><a name="index13"></a><a name="index14"></a><a name="index15"></a><p>Functions can return tuples as return values.  For example, we could write a 
function that swaps two parameters:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">swap</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">x</span>, <span class="py-src-parameter">y</span>):
    <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> <span class="py-src-variable">y</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">x</span>
</pre><p>Then we can assign the return value to a tuple with two variables:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-variable">a</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">b</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">swap</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">a</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">b</span>)
</pre><p>In this case, there is no great advantage in making <code>swap</code> a
function.  In fact, there is a danger in trying to encapsulate
<code>swap</code>, which is the following tempting mistake:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">swap</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">x</span>, <span class="py-src-parameter">y</span>):      <span class="py-src-comment"># incorrect version</span>
     <span class="py-src-variable">x</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">y</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">y</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">x</span>
</pre><p>If we call this function like this:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-variable">swap</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">a</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">b</span>)
</pre><p>then <code>a</code> and <code>x</code> are aliases for the same value.
Changing <code>x</code> inside <code>swap</code> makes <code>x</code> refer to
a different value, but it has no effect on <code>a</code> in
<code>__main__</code>.  Similarly, changing <code>y</code> has no effect on
<code>b</code>.</p><p>This function runs without producing an error message, but it doesn't do
what we intended.  This is an example of a semantic error.</p><a name="index16"></a><h2>11.4 Recursion<a name="auto3"></a></h2><a name="recursion"></a><a name="index17"></a><p>You have seen and written several functions which call other functions.
It is also legal for a function to call itself.  It may not be obvious why that 
is a good thing, but it turns out to be one of the most magical and interesting 
things a program can do.  For example, look at the following function:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">countdown</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">n</span>):
    <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">n</span> == <span class="py-src-number">0</span>:
        <span class="py-src-keyword">print</span> <span class="py-src-string">&quot;Blastoff!&quot;</span>
    <span class="py-src-keyword">else</span>:
        <span class="py-src-keyword">print</span> <span class="py-src-variable">n</span>
        <span class="py-src-variable">countdown</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">n</span>-<span class="py-src-number">1</span>)
</pre><h2>11.5 Recursive list traversal<a name="auto4"></a></h2><a name="index18"></a><a name="index19"></a><p>Python has a built-in function which finds the sum of a sequence of numbers:
</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; sum([1, 2, 8])
11
</pre><p>Suppose we have what we'll call a <em>nested number list</em>, a list whose
elements are either numbers or nested number lists themselves. If we want to
sum all the numbers in such a list, no matter how deeply nested, the built-in
<code>sum</code> function will not work for us:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; nested_number_list = [1, 2, [3, 4, [5, 6], 7], 8, [1, [1, [1, 2], 2], 8], 5]
&gt;&gt;&gt; sum(nested_number_list)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File &quot;&lt;stdin&gt;&quot;, line 1, in ?
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'int' and 'list'
</pre><p>To solve this problem, we first notice that our nested number list has a
<b>recursive definition</b>---it is defined in terms of itself.  To sum all the 
numbers in our list we need to traverse it, visiting each of the elements
within its nested structure, adding any numeric elements to our sum, and
<em>repeating this process</em> with any elements which are lists.  Thanks to
recursion, the Python code needed to do this is surprisingly short:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">recursive_sum</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">nested_list</span>):
    <span class="py-src-variable">sum</span> = <span class="py-src-number">0</span>
    <span class="py-src-keyword">for</span> <span class="py-src-variable">element</span> <span class="py-src-keyword">in</span> <span class="py-src-variable">nested_list</span>:
        <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">element</span>) == <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>([]):
            <span class="py-src-variable">sum</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">sum</span> + <span class="py-src-variable">recursive_sum</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">element</span>)
        <span class="py-src-keyword">else</span>:
            <span class="py-src-variable">sum</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">sum</span> + <span class="py-src-variable">element</span>
    <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> <span class="py-src-variable">sum</span>
</pre><p>Recursion is truly one of the most beautiful things in computer science.</p><h2>11.6 Comparing values of different types<a name="auto5"></a></h2><p>Python has a built-in function, <code>max</code>, that finds the maximum
value of a sequence:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; max([3, 9, 17, 5])
17
&gt;&gt;&gt; max(['banana', 'orange', 'apricot', 'fig'])
'orange'
</pre><p>If we want to find the maximum value in a nested number list,
<code>max</code> does not work the way we would like it to, but instead gives
us a curious result:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; max([3, 9, [1, 17], [7, 2], 5])
[7, 2]
</pre><p>To understand this result, we need to understand how Python compares
values of different types.  Python permits values of any type to be compared,
and always returns a result, though the results are sometimes a bit arbitrary:
</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; [1, 2] &gt; (1, 2)
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; [1, 2] &lt; (1, 2)
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; '12' &gt; [1, 2]
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; '12' &gt; (1, 2)
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; [1, 2] &gt; 5 
True
</pre><p>So it appears that tuples are greater than strings; strings are greater than
lists, and lists are greater than integers.  A simple experiment confirms this:
</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; (7, ) &gt; '7' &gt; [7] &gt; 7
True
</pre><p>When comparing like types, the first elements are compared.  If they match,
the second elements are compared, and so forth:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; [3, 7] &gt; [4, 5]
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; [3, 7] &gt; [3, 6, 8]
True
</pre><p>In the first example, the two items being compared are both lists, so their
first elements are compared.  Since <code>3</code> is not greater than
<code>4</code>, <code>[3, 7]</code> is not greater than <code>[4, 5]</code>.
The second example returns <code>True</code> because <code>7</code> is greater
than <code>6</code>.</p><p>result of <code>max([3, 9, [1, 17], [7, 2], 5])</code> makes sense.
</p><h2>11.7 A recursive <code>max</code> function<a name="auto6"></a></h2><a name="index20"></a><a name="index21"></a><p>If we want to find the maximum number in a nested number list, we can
write a recursive function much like the <code>recursive_sum</code> function
we wrote in the previous chapter.  To illustrate the use of modules to avoid
namespace clashes, let's name our function <code>max</code> and put it
in the <code>seqtools</code> module:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-comment"># seqtools.py
</span><span class="py-src-comment">#
</span><span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">max</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">nested_list</span>):
    <span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">nested_list</span>[<span class="py-src-number">0</span>]
    <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span>) == <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>([]):
        <span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">max</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span>)
    <span class="py-src-keyword">for</span> <span class="py-src-variable">item</span> <span class="py-src-keyword">in</span> <span class="py-src-variable">nested_list</span>[<span class="py-src-number">1</span>:]:
        <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">item</span>) == <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>([]):
            <span class="py-src-variable">its_max</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">max</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">item</span>)
            <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">its_max</span> &gt; <span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span>: <span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">its_max</span>
        <span class="py-src-keyword">else</span>:
            <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">item</span> &gt; <span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span>: <span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">item</span>
    <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> <span class="py-src-variable">the_max</span>
</pre><p>We can now use both our version and the built-in version of max:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; import seqtools
&gt;&gt;&gt; max([3, 9, [1, 17], [7, 2], 5])
[7, 2]
&gt;&gt;&gt; seqtools.max([3, 9, [1, 17], [7, 2], 5])
17
</pre><h2>11.8 Pure functions and modifiers<a name="auto7"></a></h2><a name="index22"></a><a name="index23"></a><p>Since lists are mutable, it is possible to write functions which take lists
as arguments and change them during execution.  We saw this in the previous
chapter with the <code>delete_head</code> function.  Functions like these are
called <b>modifiers</b> and the changes they make are called
<b>side effects</b>.</p><p>Lets look at another example of a modifier:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">insert_in_middle</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">val</span>, <span class="py-src-parameter">lst</span>):
    <span class="py-src-variable">middle</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">len</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">lst</span>)/<span class="py-src-number">2</span>
    <span class="py-src-variable">lst</span>[<span class="py-src-variable">middle</span>:<span class="py-src-variable">middle</span>] = [<span class="py-src-variable">val</span>]
</pre><p>We can use this to place new values in the middle of a list:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_list = ['a', 'b', 'd', 'e']
&gt;&gt;&gt; insert_in_middle('c', my_lst)
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_list
['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
</pre><p>If we try to use it with a tuple,however, we get an error:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_tuple = ('a', 'b', 'd', 'e')
&gt;&gt;&gt; insert_in_middle('c', my_tuple)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File &quot;&lt;stdin&gt;&quot;, line 1, in ?
  File &quot;&lt;stdin&gt;&quot;, line 3, in insert_in_middle
TypeError: object doesn't support slice assignment
</pre><p>The problem is that tuples are immutable, and don't support slice
assignment.  A simple solution to this problem is to make
<code>insert_in_middle</code> a pure function:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">insert_in_middle</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">val</span>, <span class="py-src-parameter">tup</span>):
    <span class="py-src-variable">middle</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">len</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">tup</span>)/<span class="py-src-number">2</span>
    <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> <span class="py-src-variable">tup</span>[:<span class="py-src-variable">middle</span>] + (<span class="py-src-variable">val</span>,) + <span class="py-src-variable">tup</span>[<span class="py-src-variable">middle</span>:]
</pre><p>This version now works for tuples, but not for lists or strings.  If we
want a version that works for all sequence types, we need a way to encapsulate
our value into the correct sequence type.  A small helper function does the
trick:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">encapsulate</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">val</span>, <span class="py-src-parameter">seq</span>):
    <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">seq</span>) == <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>(<span class="py-src-string">&quot;&quot;</span>):
        <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> <span class="py-src-variable">str</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">val</span>)
    <span class="py-src-keyword">if</span> <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">seq</span>) == <span class="py-src-variable">type</span>([]):
        <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> [<span class="py-src-variable">val</span>]
    <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> (<span class="py-src-variable">val</span>,)
</pre><p>Now we can write <code>insert_in_middle</code> to work with each of the
built-in sequence types:</p><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">insert_in_middle</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">val</span>, <span class="py-src-parameter">seq</span>):
    <span class="py-src-variable">middle</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">len</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">seq</span>)/<span class="py-src-number">2</span>
    <span class="py-src-keyword">return</span> <span class="py-src-variable">seq</span>[:<span class="py-src-variable">middle</span>] + <span class="py-src-variable">encapsulate</span>(<span class="py-src-variable">val</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">seq</span>) + <span class="py-src-variable">seq</span>[<span class="py-src-variable">middle</span>:]
</pre><p>The last to versions of <code>insert_in_middle</code> are pure functions,
and they don't have any side effects:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_string = 'abde'
&gt;&gt;&gt; insert_in_middle('c', my_string)
'abcde'
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_string
'abde'
</pre><p>If we want to use <code>insert_in_middle</code> to change the value of
<code>my_string</code>, we have to assign the value returned by the
function call back to the variable:</p><pre class="python-interpreter">
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_string = insert_in_middle('c', my_string)
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_string
'abcde' 
</pre><h2>11.9 Which is better?<a name="auto8"></a></h2><a name="index24"></a><p>Anything that can be done with modifiers can also be done with pure
functions.  In fact, some programming languages only allow pure functions.
There is some evidence that programs that use pure functions are faster to
develop and less error-prone than programs that use modifiers.  Nevertheless,
modifiers are convenient at times, and in some cases, functional programs are
less efficient.</p><p>In general, we recommend that you write pure functions whenever it is
reasonable to do so and resort to modifiers only if there is a compelling
advantage.  This approach might be called a
<b>functional programming style</b>.</p><h2>11.10 Glossary<a name="auto9"></a></h2><a name="index25"></a><a name="index26"></a><a name="index27"></a><a name="index28"></a><a name="index29"></a><a name="index30"></a><a name="index31"></a><a name="index32"></a><a name="index33"></a><a name="index34"></a><a name="index35"></a><a name="index36"></a><a name="index37"></a><dl><dt>immutable type:</dt><dd>A type in which the elements cannot be modified.  Assignments to elements
or slices of immutable types cause an error.</dd><dt>mutable type:</dt><dd>A data type in which the elements can be modified.  All mutable types are
compound types.  Lists and dictionaries (see next chapter) are mutable data
types; strings and tuples are not.</dd><dt>tuple:</dt><dd>A sequence type that is similar to a list except that it is immutable.
Tuples can be used wherever an immutable type is required, such as a key in a
dictionary.</dd><dt>tuple assignment:</dt><dd>An assignment to all of the elements in a tuple using a single assignment
statement. Tuple assignment occurs in parallel rather than in sequence, making
it useful for swapping values.</dd><dt>module:</dt><dd>A file containing definitions and statements intended to be
<em>imported</em> by other programs.  File names for Python modules must end in 
a <code>.py</code> file extention, and the module name is the filename without
the extention.</dd><dt>recursive definition:</dt><dd>A definition which defines something in terms of itself. To be useful it
must include <em>base cases</em> which are not recursive.  In this way it
differs from a <em>circular definition</em>.  Recursive definitions often
provide an elegant way to express complex data structures.</dd><dt>recursion:</dt><dd>The process of calling the function that is currently executing.</dd><dt>recursive call:</dt><dd>The statement in a recursive function with is a call to itself.</dd><dt>base case:</dt><dd>A branch of the conditional statement in a recursive function that does not
result in a recursive call.</dd><dt>infinite recursion:</dt><dd>A function that calls itself recursively without ever reaching the base
case.  Eventually, an infinite recursion causes a runtime error.</dd><dt>tail recursion:</dt><dd>A recursive call that occurs as the last statement (at the tail) of a
recursive function.  Tail recursion is considered bad practice in Python
programs since a logically equivalent function can be written using
<em>iteration</em> which is more efficient.</dd></dl><h2>11.11 Exercises<a name="auto10"></a></h2><ol><li><div class="exercise"><pre class="python">
<span class="py-src-keyword">def</span> <span class="py-src-identifier">swap</span>(<span class="py-src-parameter">x</span>, <span class="py-src-parameter">y</span>):      <span class="py-src-comment"># incorrect version</span>
     <span class="py-src-variable">x</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">y</span> = <span class="py-src-variable">y</span>, <span class="py-src-variable">x</span>
</pre>
Draw a state diagram for this function so that you can see why it doesn't work.
</div></li></ol></div><p><a href="index.xhtml">Table of Contents</a> |
    <a href="dex.xhtml">Index</a></p></body></html>